Thus far in this course, we always used our HTTP server here to serve our application under
http://localhost:8080
and that was all we needed because progressive web apps happen in the browser,
all these features happened the browser, service workers run in the browser in the end.
Now however, we have a use case where we also need to tweak our server-side code and especially for the next
module, it will be very important that we can write some server-side code.
Now you could have your own Node server which could be an API for a single page app or the same server
rendering these pages,
it doesn't matter
and you can add your own code to this server of course. Now in our set up here, we don't have our own
server,
HTTP server is just a development dummy server,
we can't really configure it that much and we shouldn't,
it's not meant to run in production.
However we already use Firebase here and Firebase has a nice feature which is cloud functions.
Here we can define some code which should run on-demand,
so basically whenever a certain event triggers.
So you can think of these functions like rest API endpoints for example,
you could also set up functions which run whenever something is added to the database but you can also
just set up your own endpoint, your own API endpoint
so that Firebase really is your back-end server and this is just an example because it's easy to set
up,
you can of course also write your own NodeJS application, I want to stress this,
you don't need to use Firebase at all. Here however,
I will use it because it's convenient,
so for that I'll open up the terminal
and this is the normal terminal just integrated into my IDE and I'll install a new package, Firebase. I will
install it globally on my machine and on Mac, you may need to add sudo in front of it,
on Windows you don't
and then I use npm which you already have since you have NodeJS
on your machine,
npm install -g and then it's firebase-tools,
this is basically a command line interface Firebase offers you to manage your project and I want to manage
this project with Firebase now.
Now here I'm prompted to enter my password,
this might not be the case for your set up and once you entered it if you need to, it will install this
Firebase CLI on your machine.
Now you will see in a second why this is useful or important.
So once the installation of the Firebase tools finished successfully, navigate into the project folder
in this terminal, I already am inside the complete guide folder here
and then inside this project folder, run Firebase init. Firebase should now be available
since you installed that CLI globally, this will put this project under control of Firebase and no
worries, this won't destroy anything. Here you can define which features you want to use,
you select them by hitting the space button, I'll select functions to write this server-side code which I can
trigger by sending requests to API endpoints and hosting which will become important later once we deploy
this into the web and don't run it on our local development machine anymore.
Hit enter and then you have to associate this with one of your projects,
so for me that's pwagram,
so I will pick that, hit enter again. As a next step,
it asks if you want to install the dependencies, enter y here
for yes
and hit enter and this will now pull down all the dependencies it needs to allow you write
these cloud functions because as I just mentioned, cloud functions is just NodeJS code running on
your server and therefore, it requires some dependencies.
Then you can define what the public directory is and the default of public is already correct here,
this is where we in the end serve our application from, so I'll just hit enter and do you want to configure this as
a single page app.
I will hit no
because we actually have multiple pages,
we have the help page
and our starting page,
so we don't have a single page application here.
It asks us if it should overwrite the index.html file,
definitely enter n for no here and hit enter and you're done.
Now this is an one-time process,
you don't have to repeat this,
it also gives you this 404.html file now to handle 404 errors,
you can leave it here, it doesn't hurt and this firebase.json file which has some configuration,
the default should be fine,
this firebase.rc file also has a configuration about the project it manages, this should also be correct.
You also have this new functions folder and this is important because here you can now write your own
function
and as I told you, this allows us to basically write a rest API endpoint which will run on your own Firebase
project server. In the index.js file, you write normal NodeJS application code and actually, you
can even use Express here,
so definitely not that far off your traditional application, you just don't need to do all the initialization,
you don't need to listen to a port, that already is happening for you.
Now in there, let's create a new rest API endpoint by commenting this out and I will rename Hello World
to store post data, whatever you like,
this is just the name I pick here
and the other side here simply defines how this should be triggered. Functions gives you access to
Firebase functions, to this helper library here,
it uses ES6 syntax which is why we have const here, you can of course use var. Https
means the event is an HTTP request, an incoming one
which is exactly what we want, to send the request to this API.
On request,
well that just clarifies it, on a request,
this function will be executed.
This is an ES6 arrow function,
you can of course use
a normal function,
so I just replaced it and here, we're just sent back a response,
hello from Firebase.
Now for now what I want to do here is, I want to simply store the data in the Firebase database.
This might look redundant right now because we already can do this by simply sending a post request
to our endpoint here with posts.json but it will become important later once we add push notifications
and want to store an image too, so I will already start setting this up. To store data in the database,
I need some additional packages here,
so open up your terminal again and navigate into that functions folder in your project folder,
make sure you are inside there and then inside this folder, you want to install two additional packages
with npm install.
First of all, I'll add Firebase admin and I will install cors, I'll add --save to also store an
entry in the package.json file here. So this will install these new packages in this functions folder
only.
Now back in index.js
here in the functions folder, I want to use these packages. For that,
I'll import them at the top,
first of all admin requires Firebase admin,
this will give us access to the Firebase database,
so just as before when we directly send this from our front-end code, here we can basically access the
database when we already are in some code running on the server so to say and cors will become important
to send the right headers so that we can access this HTTP endpoint from an application running on a different
server
which of course might be the case and will be the case during development.
So here I will require cors and this actually export the function we immediately need to execute where
we pass origin
true to simply tell it that we want to allow cross-origin-access.
Now here inside this function
here, you execute the code you want to execute whenever a request reaches this endpoint and I will show
you the exact URL you need to send a request to in a second.
So here, I
first of all will use cors and this will give me a function with request and response, so it will
basically wrap all the code I want to execute and we'll automatically send the right headers to allow
cross-origin-access by doing so.
The next thing I will do is I will access admin and there I can access the database function to access my database,
I want to access the posts node here,
so just as we do before, this will then access
the post node here in my database and there, I want to push a new post and I expect to
get data sent to this request.
Now to get data sent to this request, we already get application/json data or we will get this eventually,
so what I will do is I will push a new Javascript object,
this object here onto posts where I expect to have an ID which I can get from request body ID,
I expect to have an ID field there and I will have because in the service worker, we will send a
request which has ID,
title, location and image as fields,
so I want to extract the ID. Of course I also want to extract the title and the location and you guessed
it, I'll do the same for my image, so the image which I will store here too, image property, that shall also
be extracted from request body image. You might recognize this code from your last Node application where
you're simply writing comparable code here.
So I'm pushing this object onto my Firebase database and that is actually all I want to do for now,
well almost, I'll chain a then call here to execute it
when this was successful, in this case if it was successful, I want to send a new response where I
will set the status code to 201 for something was entered successfully and some JSON data,
again using normal Express syntax you might know where I will simply send a message, data stored and
important,
the ID of the data we stored because this is what I want to use in my service worker to delete the
right element from my indexedDB,
so here I will send request body ID again as response. I also will catch any errors to handle these
too and there I want to then send a response with status code 500 for
server-side error and a JSON object where I have my error sent back to the front-end.
This is now my own API,
the question of course is, how do we send requests to it?
It's actually super simple.
First of all, we need to deploy this to the server,
for that we can use Firebase, the CLI we install and call deploy
and this will now deploy our front-end application in the public folder,
we'll use that later though
and our functions as you can see, takes a couple of seconds up to minutes and I will inform you once
it is done. The deployment finished and it shows you the URL under which you can access your page,
again I'll do this later in this course,
it also shows you this function URL.
Now you can just copy that and this is the new URL to which you want to send your requests.
So in the service-worker.js file where we send requests to the database basically or that also
uses a rest endpoint in the end
but it maps directly to the database, Firebase does this,
I will replace this with our
URL and you don't need to and shouldn't add JSON at the end,
don't add it, just send it to this endpoint, that's the endpoint
we defined, store post data,
that's exactly what we set up here as a name.
So this is what I want to send my data to,
I also need to replace it in the feed.js
file in our fallback send data method
and now let's see if that works.
Now for that first of all, I'll bump up the static cache version and then back in our application, I'll
close this tab, open a new one to install my new service worker
and I'll see if this works.
Let me send a new post, some title, send via custom endpoint and some location. Let's hit post, it sent data,
let's see if the data was added here,
we got a new entry, some titles sent via custom endpoint, some location.
And if you check your cloud functions here on the Firebase back-end, you should see there's one function,
you can access the logs here
and this may take some time to update so that you really see it
but in these logs, you should see the request you just sent.
So here are no logs yet, again this will update,
however one thing we can improve now since this works and we can see this in our application, on the
response in the body, well we can't see it here because I need to call JSON first
but there we will actually get back the ID because remember, we'd set this up here in the function, we return
the ID along with the message.
So what I can do now is, I want to clean this up in service-worker.js by no longer using this method
which didn't work correctly, using the ID in the loop which doesn't work,
I want to instead use the ID from the response. So I will extract the JSON data from the response,
call then here because it's an asynchronous operation, here I have my response data in that function
and now I will delete data inside that then block here and use res data ID
and again I know that there will be an ID field because we return it here.
So this is what I want to do in my service worker now, extract the response data and then delete an
item once I got that data using that ID we get back from the server
and with this added, now if I go offline or first of all though, I need to update my service worker,
so I'll clear everything, reload the page and now I will go offline to queue up a couple of posts. So I
will queue up post one with location one, I have no connection so it doesn't send it yet, then I will add post
two with location two
and if I refresh indexedDB, you will see both are queued up here.
Now if I go back online, go to the console here, you will see it triggers that event,
now however it fails.
Now why does that happen?
Let's fix it in the next lecture.